README.md, before:

# Big Data with R
This is an introduction to Big Data with R course at Imperial College London. Over the span of two 1.5-hour sessions, participants will gain hands-on experience with powerful tools such as **data.table** and **Sparklyr** in R. There sessions are designed to equip you with practical skills for managing and analyzing large datasets in your daily research activities, enhancing your research capabilities with dynamic and efficient methods. Join us to explore there essential big data techniques and elevate your data analysis proficiency.

## Course length and deliver method
2 x 1.5 hour classes
in-person or online

<img src="/fig/ecri.webp" width="300" />

## Prerequisites

- dplyr or tidyverse in R: self-learning tutorial [https://github.com/ImperialCollegeLondon/RCDS-data-processing-with-r](https://github.com/ImperialCollegeLondon/RCDS-data-processing-with-r)

### Setup RStudio environment

#### Option 1: GitHub Codespace

- Create or return to GitHub Codespace for this repository by clicking the green "Code" button and then "Create codespace on main" or "return to existing codespace""
    <img src="/fig/create_or_return_codespaces.png" width="500" />
    
- run 
`
wget -O spark-3.5.3-bin-hadoop3.tgz https://archive.apache.org/dist/spark/spark-3.5.3/spark-3.5.3-bin-hadoop3.tgz
`
to download spark package (about 400MB)

- upload the downloaded `spark-3.5.3-bin-hadoop3.tgz` to the Codespace (drag and drop is OK)


- Access RStudio Server in the Codespace from 'PORTS' tab (usually at port 8787)

    - In the 'TERMINAL' tab, run `watch -n 1200 ls` to avoid Codespace from going to sleep

- In the RStudio Server (Open from the 'PORTS' tab), install "sparklyr" using console window for Part 2 (day 2) exercises:

  - library(sparklyr)

  - spark_install_tar('/path/to/spark-3.5.3-bin-hadoop3.tgz')

#### Option 2: HPC

If you have access to [HPC](https://www.imperial.ac.uk/admin-services/ict/self-service/research-support/rcs/get-access/), you can setup your RStudio environment on HPC with [Open OnDemand](https://openondemand.rcs.ic.ac.uk/)

#### Option 3: Local computer
- Setup R and RStudio environment
  - install R 4.1 or higher (**skip this step on HPC**)
  - install the latest RStudio (**skip this step on HPC** )
  - in RStudio, install packages "dplyr" and "sparklyr" if they are not installed
  - sparklyr also requires Java JDK (openjdk is OK)
  - run `library(sparklyr)` then `spark_install()`    
      - If encounter errors with `spark_install()`, use `spark_version()` to check available versions of spark. For Java version >= 11, please install spark 3.0 or higher by running `spark_install(version = "xxxx")`, where
 `xxxx` denotes the version of spark.
      - If `spark_install(version = "xxxx")` failed, could try to download the expected `tgz` file and then use `spark_install_tar("path/to/the/tgz")`
      - Run `spark_installed_versions()` to check the installed spark 
      
      
## Data for practice

- data can be download from [here or data folder](https://github.com/ImperialCollegeLondon/RCDS-BigDataWithR/raw/refs/heads/main/data/compustat2023.csv.zip)

- columns in the data
  - "gvkey": Company identifiers in the Compustat database  
  - "iid": Issue ID
  - "datadate": Trading date
  - "conm": Company names
  - "prccd": Close price
  - "prchd": High price
  - "prcld": Low price
  - "exchg": Stock exchange codes
  
## Learning Outcomes

- **Understand** the challenges of working on big datasets on local computer with common methods in R.
- **Use** the packages in RStudio or R to load big datasets more efficiently.
- **Compose** code for processing big datasets.
- **Manage** data types according to needs.
- **Interpret** common errors and use these to help debug R code.

## Part 1: Big data with data.table

Please check [bigdata_R_part1.Rmd](code/bigdata_R_part1.Rmd) for hands-on practice.

*Solution is [here](code/solutions/bigdata_R_part1_sol.Rmd)*

## Part 2: More advanced big data integration with Spark

Please check [bigdata_R_part2.Rmd](code/bigdata_R_part2.Rmd) for hands-on practice.

*Solution is [here](code/solutions/bigdata_R_part2_sol.Rmd)*

## Acknowledgement

I am particularly thankful to Dr. Katerina Michalickova, Dr. Chris Cooling, Dr. John W. Pinney, and Dr. Jay DesLauriers for their invaluable insights and advice.

## Feedback form

Commit message:

add rstudio port figure and instructions

README.md, after:

# Big Data with R
This is an introduction to Big Data with R course at Imperial College London. Over the span of two 1.5-hour sessions, participants will gain hands-on experience with powerful tools such as **data.table** and **Sparklyr** in R. There sessions are designed to equip you with practical skills for managing and analyzing large datasets in your daily research activities, enhancing your research capabilities with dynamic and efficient methods. Join us to explore there essential big data techniques and elevate your data analysis proficiency.

## Course length and deliver method
2 x 1.5 hour classes
in-person or online

<img src="/fig/ecri.webp" width="300" />

## Prerequisites

- dplyr or tidyverse in R: self-learning tutorial [https://github.com/ImperialCollegeLondon/RCDS-data-processing-with-r](https://github.com/ImperialCollegeLondon/RCDS-data-processing-with-r)

### Setup RStudio environment

#### Option 1: GitHub Codespace (recommended)

- Create or return to GitHub Codespace for this repository by clicking the green "Code" button and then "Create codespace on main" or "return to existing codespace""
    <img src="/fig/create_or_return_codespaces.png" width="500" />
    
    - wait for about 5-10 minutes for creating a codespace. 
    
    - From the PORT (lower pane on the middle or right-hand side), "8787" port should be green and click on the "globe" icon
    
    <img src="/fig/rstudio_port.png" width="500" />
    
- run 
`
wget -O spark-3.5.3-bin-hadoop3.tgz https://archive.apache.org/dist/spark/spark-3.5.3/spark-3.5.3-bin-hadoop3.tgz
`
to download spark package (about 400MB)

- upload the downloaded `spark-3.5.3-bin-hadoop3.tgz` to the Codespace (drag and drop is OK)


- Access RStudio Server in the Codespace from 'PORTS' tab (usually at port 8787)

    - In the 'TERMINAL' tab, run `watch -n 1200 ls` to avoid Codespace from going to sleep

- In the RStudio Server (Open from the 'PORTS' tab), install "sparklyr" using console window for Part 2 (day 2) exercises:

  - library(sparklyr)

  - spark_install_tar('/path/to/spark-3.5.3-bin-hadoop3.tgz')

#### Option 2: HPC

If you have access to [HPC](https://www.imperial.ac.uk/admin-services/ict/self-service/research-support/rcs/get-access/), you can setup your RStudio environment on HPC with [Open OnDemand](https://openondemand.rcs.ic.ac.uk/)

#### Option 3: Local computer
- Setup R and RStudio environment
  - install R 4.1 or higher (**skip this step on HPC**)
  - install the latest RStudio (**skip this step on HPC** )
  - in RStudio, install packages "dplyr" and "sparklyr" if they are not installed
  - sparklyr also requires Java JDK (openjdk is OK)
  - run `library(sparklyr)` then `spark_install()`    
      - If encounter errors with `spark_install()`, use `spark_version()` to check available versions of spark. For Java version >= 11, please install spark 3.0 or higher by running `spark_install(version = "xxxx")`, where
 `xxxx` denotes the version of spark.
      - If `spark_install(version = "xxxx")` failed, could try to download the expected `tgz` file and then use `spark_install_tar("path/to/the/tgz")`
      - Run `spark_installed_versions()` to check the installed spark 
      
      
## Data for practice

- data can be download from [here or data folder](https://github.com/ImperialCollegeLondon/RCDS-BigDataWithR/raw/refs/heads/main/data/compustat2023.csv.zip)

- columns in the data
  - "gvkey": Company identifiers in the Compustat database  
  - "iid": Issue ID
  - "datadate": Trading date
  - "conm": Company names
  - "prccd": Close price
  - "prchd": High price
  - "prcld": Low price
  - "exchg": Stock exchange codes
  
## Learning Outcomes

- **Understand** the challenges of working on big datasets on local computer with common methods in R.
- **Use** the packages in RStudio or R to load big datasets more efficiently.
- **Compose** code for processing big datasets.
- **Manage** data types according to needs.
- **Interpret** common errors and use these to help debug R code.

## Part 1: Big data with data.table

Please check [bigdata_R_part1.Rmd](code/bigdata_R_part1.Rmd) for hands-on practice.

*Solution is [here](code/solutions/bigdata_R_part1_sol.Rmd)*

## Part 2: More advanced big data integration with Spark

Please check [bigdata_R_part2.Rmd](code/bigdata_R_part2.Rmd) for hands-on practice.

*Solution is [here](code/solutions/bigdata_R_part2_sol.Rmd)*

## Acknowledgement

I am particularly thankful to Dr. Katerina Michalickova, Dr. Chris Cooling, Dr. John W. Pinney, and Dr. Jay DesLauriers for their invaluable insights and advice.

## Feedback form
